Update Documentation: Configuration Cache main page (#37767)
gradle/gradle: platforms/documentation/docs/src/docs/userguide/optimizing-builds/configuration-cache/configuration_cache.adoc

image::configuration-cache-4.png[]

[IMPORTANT]
====

> This feature is _not enabled by default_ and has the following limitations:

Reviewer: 💭 We've committed to enabled by default in Gradle 10, so maybe we want to hint that this is coming soon?

[cols="~,~,~,~,~"]
|===

> | Cache | What It Caches | Cache Key | Work Avoidance | Parallelism Win

Reviewer: 💅 "Parallelism Win" sounds perhaps a bit too informal.

| *Configuration Cache*
| The result of the configuration phase: the task graph, each task's configured state, and dependency information
| Build logic and environment (build scripts, init scripts, environment variables and properties read at configuration time, and more)
| Skips the configuration phase entirely on a cache hit
| Enables intra-project parallel task execution

| *Build Cache*
| Task outputs and artifact transform outputs
| Each task's declared inputs (sources, classpath, action implementation)
| Skips task execution by reusing previous outputs
| Composes with `--parallel` for cross-project parallel execution

|===

The Configuration Cache and the Build Cache store different types of data:

- *Build Cache*: Stores outputs and intermediate files of the build (e.g., task outputs, artifact transform outputs).
- *Configuration Cache*: Stores the build configuration for a particular set of tasks, capturing the output of the configuration phase.

image::configuration-cache-2.png[]

[[config_cache:intro:how_does_it_work]]
== How It Works

> When the Configuration Cache is enabled, and you run Gradle for a set of tasks (for example, `./gradlew check`), Gradle's job is to avoid re-running the configuration phase if nothing about the build configuration has changed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When the Configuration Cache is enabled, and you run Gradle for a set of tasks (for example, `./gradlew check`) that you have already run once, Gradle will avoid re-configuring the build if no relevant inputs to configuration have changed.
```

But **whether they run, and when they do, depends on a cache hit or miss**.

[cols="~,~,~"]
|===
| Phase | Without the Configuration Cache | With the Configuration Cache

| *Initialization*
| Runs every build. Detects the settings file, creates the `Settings` and `Project` instances, and determines the structure of the build.
| Runs every build. The settings script's contents contribute to the cache fingerprint, but the script itself only re-runs on a cache miss.

| *Configuration*
| Runs every build. Evaluates init scripts, the settings script, `buildSrc`, and every project's build script; applies plugins; computes the task graph.
| **Runs only on a cache miss.** On a hit, the entire configuration phase is skipped; Gradle restores the task graph directly from the cache.

| *Execution*
| Runs the scheduled tasks against the just-computed task graph.
| Runs the scheduled tasks against the deserialized task graph. Tasks are isolated from each other through serialization (see <<config_cache:intro:serialization, Serialization>>), which enables intra-project parallel execution.
|===

image::configuration-cache-6.png[]

=== The Hit-or-Miss Decision

> At the start of every invocation, Gradle uses the requested tasks (and their command-line arguments) as a *cache key*, then checks whether a stored entry matches that key.

Reviewer: A cache key contains much more than just the requested tasks and arguments.  I think this needs to say something like "the requested tasks, their arguments, and some other environmental information".  Some other things are added to the cache key computation and aren't just left to the fingerprint.

Even on a miss, Gradle then **loads the task graph back from the cache it just wrote** and executes against the loaded copy.
This always-load behavior is intentional: it guarantees that hits and misses execute through the same code path, so any serialization-related issue surfaces on the first run rather than later.

[NOTE]
====
For plugin authors, the always-load semantic has a practical consequence: a task that works during the configuration phase but breaks after a round-trip through serialization will fail on the *first* build with the Configuration Cache enabled, not on a later run.
This is why we recommend testing your plugin with `--configuration-cache` from the start of development.
====

[[subsequent_runs]]
=== Cache Hit

image::configuration-cache-3.png[]

On a cache hit (a subsequent invocation of the same tasks where no configuration inputs have changed), Gradle skips the configuration phase entirely.
It does *not*:

- Run init scripts.
- Evaluate the settings script.
- Configure or rebuild `buildSrc` (unless its inputs changed, which is itself a miss).
- Apply project plugins.

> - Compute the task graph.

Reviewer: ❗ This is confusing to me.  Is it trying to say that Gradle will act as if init scripts are not present?  That project plugins won't be applied?

Author: removed.

Instead, Gradle restores the task graph by deserializing the cache entry, then proceeds straight to execution.

[NOTE]
====

> The lifecycle change has direct consequences for how build logic should be written: some configuration-time code only runs on a cache miss, and some lifecycle callbacks do not fire on a cache hit.

Reviewer: ❗ This makes me nervous.  Which ones?  I can't count on lifecycle callbacks firing?  This makes me not want to enable CC.

[cols="~,~,~,~,~"]
|===
| Cache | What It Caches | Cache Key | Work Avoidance | Parallelism

| *Build Cache*
| Task outputs and artifact transform outputs
| Each task's declared inputs (sources, classpath, action implementation)
| Skips task execution by reusing previous outputs
| Composes with `--parallel` for cross-project parallel execution

| *Configuration Cache*
| The result of the configuration phase: the task graph, each task's configured state, and dependency information
| Build logic and environment (build scripts, init scripts, environment variables and properties read at configuration time, and more)
| Skips the configuration phase entirely on a cache hit

> | Enables intra-project parallel task execution

Reviewer 2: 💅Maybe "Enable parallel task execution within the same project", to make it easier for those beginning their English journey?

- *Configuration Cache*: Stores the build configuration for a particular set of tasks, capturing the output of the configuration phase.

image::configuration-cache-2.png[]

[[config_cache:intro:how_does_it_work]]
== How It Works

When the Configuration Cache is enabled, and you run Gradle for a set of tasks (for example, `./gradlew check`) that you have already run once, Gradle will avoid re-configuring the build if no relevant inputs to configuration have changed.

[[config_cache:intro:lifecycle]]
=== The Build Lifecycle

Enabling the Configuration Cache changes how Gradle moves through the <<build_lifecycle_intermediate.adoc#build_lifecycle, three build phases>>.
The phases themselves are unchanged: initialization, configuration, and execution.
But **whether they run, and when they do, depends on a cache hit or miss**.

[cols="~,~,~"]
|===
| Phase | Without the Configuration Cache | With the Configuration Cache

| *Initialization*
| Runs every build. Detects the settings file, creates the `Settings` and `Project` instances, and determines the structure of the build.

> | Runs every build.

Reviewer 2: :nail_care: Initialization with CC is very different. Maybe we can elaborate a bit here - 
>Runs every build. Locates the cache entry, verifies if it is up-to-date and deserializes the task graph, or falls back to full initialization if there is no valid entry.

| *Configuration*
| Runs every build. Evaluates init scripts, the settings script, `buildSrc`, and every project's build script; applies plugins; computes the task graph.
| **Runs only on a cache miss.** On a hit, the entire configuration phase is skipped; Gradle restores the task graph directly from the cache.

| *Execution*
| Runs the scheduled tasks against the just-computed task graph.
| Runs the scheduled tasks against the deserialized task graph. Tasks are isolated from each other through serialization (see <<config_cache:intro:serialization, Serialization>>), which enables intra-project parallel execution.
|===

image::configuration-cache-6.png[]

=== The Hit-or-Miss Decision

> At the start of every invocation, Gradle uses the requested tasks, their arguments, and some other environmental information as a *cache key*, then checks whether a stored entry matches that key.

Reviewer 2: :thinking: The way I read "a stored entry matches that key" kind of implies that there is only one entry, though maybe `a` should have told me that there are many. I'd put it 
"check whether there is a stored entry matching the key" to emphasize there is a lookup going on.

> If a candidate entry exists, Gradle compares the build's current <<config_cache:intro:build_configuration_inputs, configuration inputs>> against the entry's recorded fingerprint.

Reviewer 2: :thinking: Maybe clarify what "fingerprint" is? What Gradle actually does, it checks if the build inputs discovered when preparing the entry still have the same values.

UPD: I see it is covered later in the doc, but maybe it is still worth explaining here.

A **hit** means every recorded input still matches; a **miss** means at least one input has changed (or no entry exists for this key yet).

=== Cache Miss

image::configuration-cache-1.png[]

On a cache miss (the first build with the Configuration Cache enabled, or any build whose configuration inputs have changed), Gradle runs the configuration phase as it would without the cache:

1. Run init scripts.
2. Run the settings script, applying any requested settings plugins.
3. Configure and build the `buildSrc` project, if present.
4. Run build scripts, applying any requested project plugins. If plugins come from included builds, Gradle builds them first.
5. Calculate the task graph, executing deferred configuration actions.

Gradle then **serializes the resulting task graph and writes it to the cache** before execution begins.

Even on a miss, Gradle then **loads the task graph back from the cache it just wrote** and executes against the loaded copy.

> This always-load behavior is intentional: it guarantees that hits and misses execute through the same code path, so any serialization-related issue surfaces on the first run rather than later.

Reviewer 2: :thinking: it is worth noting that it also allows parallel task execution.

This is why we recommend testing your plugin with `--configuration-cache` from the start of development.
====

[[subsequent_runs]]
=== Cache Hit

image::configuration-cache-3.png[]

On a cache hit (a subsequent invocation of the same tasks where no configuration inputs have changed), Gradle skips the configuration phase entirely.
Instead, Gradle restores the task graph by deserializing the cache entry, then proceeds straight to execution.

Because the configuration phase is skipped on a hit, any logic registered through configuration-phase callbacks, such as `BuildListener`, `Gradle.beforeProject`, `Gradle.afterProject`, or `Gradle.taskGraph.whenReady`, will not re-execute.
Build logic that needs to react to task execution should use a <<build_services#operation_listener, Build Service>> registered as an `OperationCompletionListener` instead.
See <<configuration_cache_requirements.adoc#config_cache:requirements:build_listeners, Using Build Listeners>> for the full list of affected APIs and their replacements.

=== Configuration Cache Entries

A Configuration Cache entry stores:

- The set of tasks to run
- Their configuration details

> - Dependency information

Reviewer 2: ❔Does this mean "task dependency information"?

image::configuration-cache-3.png[]

On a cache hit (a subsequent invocation of the same tasks where no configuration inputs have changed), Gradle skips the configuration phase entirely.
Instead, Gradle restores the task graph by deserializing the cache entry, then proceeds straight to execution.

> Because the configuration phase is skipped on a hit, any logic registered through configuration-phase callbacks, such as `BuildListener`, `Gradle.beforeProject`, `Gradle.afterProject`, or `Gradle.taskGraph.whenReady`, will not execute.

Reviewer: will not **re-execute**

** `GRADLE_USER_HOME`
** Gradle Daemon JVM
2. Init scripts

> 3. `buildSrc` and included build logic, build contents (build scripts, sources, and intermediate build outputs)

Reviewer 2: :x: this should be parsed as "contents of buildSrc and included build logic builds", so the comma is wrong. Our own "buffalo buffalo buffalo".

9. System properties used during the configuration phase
10. Environment variables used during the configuration phase

[[config_cache:intro:serialization]]
=== Serialization

Serialization is the mechanism that makes the Configuration Cache possible.
When Gradle stores a cache entry, it walks the configured task graph and writes a binary snapshot of every task and the state reachable from it.
When Gradle loads a cache entry, it reverses the process to reconstruct the task graph for execution.

==== What gets serialized

A Configuration Cache entry contains:

- The set of tasks scheduled to run, in dependency order.

> - Each task instance's complete state: every reachable field is serialized, including private fields and fields that are not annotated as `@Input`, `@OutputFile`, or `@Internal`.

Reviewer 2: :nail_care: maybe drop "reachable"? An "instance field" (as opposed to a static one) would be more relevant.

References to these types are rejected with a Configuration Cache problem at store time, before they can cause a runtime failure on a later load.

Because every reachable field is captured, sensitive values held in task state (such as credentials, tokens, and API keys) also land in the cache entry.
Gradle encrypts cache entries on disk to mitigate the risk of accidental exposure.
See <<configuration_cache_requirements.adoc#config_cache:secrets, Handling of Credentials and Secrets>> for details.

The serialized task graph is stored alongside a separate **fingerprint**: the recorded list of configuration inputs the build observed (see <<config_cache:intro:build_configuration_inputs, Build Configuration Inputs>>).
The two are distinct: the entry holds the *result* of configuration, the fingerprint holds the *evidence* that the result is still valid.
Loading an entry on a hit uses both: Gradle replays the fingerprint to confirm validity, then deserializes the entry to reconstruct the task graph.

image::configuration-cache-7.png[]

==== Codecs

Gradle has a dedicated *codec* for each type or family of types it knows how to serialize.
Four codecs are worth understanding:

> - The *task node codec* writes and reads the units of the task graph itself.

Reviewer 2: :x: Seems irrelevant (Nodes are an internal concept). We can say that we serialize all scheduled task instances.

Author: Codec information was removed entirely.

> - The *bean codec* is the fallback for arbitrary user-defined classes; it walks fields using reflection and recursively serializes each one.

Reviewer 2: :x: This is all valid and important, but I'd rather not refer to it as "bean". 

Maybe "the default serialization" and then "some types are subjects to more specific handling".

Author: Incorrect codec information was removed entirely.

Most plugin-defined task and extension types end up handled by the bean codec without any extra work from the author.

> - The *provider codec* handles `Provider` and `Property` instances.

Reviewer 2: :x: Providers (and Properties) are handled specially by the configuration cache. CC attempts to pre-compute and simplify provider chains it discovers while walking the graph. Then we can point readers to the Provider javadocs where the idea is explained in more detail.

Author: Codec information was removed entirely.

> The provider codec **freezes lazy values**: the value a provider would compute is captured at store time and replayed at load time, so providers do not re-evaluate their original sources during execution.

Reviewer 2: :x: This is not always true, and may give wrong ideas to users. We should be clear that only some providers are subject to this treatment.

Author: Codec information was removed entirely.

> This is why properties wired through `Provider` and `Property` survive the cache round-trip cleanly even when the original source (e.g., a file or environment variable) is no longer accessible at execution time.

Reviewer 2: :x: I don't understand this. As written, it is completely wrong: if something is gone by execution time, then CC entry is invalidated.

Author: Incorrect codec information was removed entirely.

- The *configuration codec* handles `Configuration` instances by resolving them at store time and serializing the result as a file collection.
This is why dependency resolution is <<config_cache:intro:behavior_differences, eager under the Configuration Cache>>: every declared configuration must be resolved at store time so its files can be captured into the cache entry.

> At load time, the task sees the resolved files, not the original `Configuration` object.

Reviewer 2: :thinking: One important consequence is that the restored object is a `FileCollection` but not `Configuration`, so authors who only need files (for classpath/other processing) should declare their tasks' field as `FileCollection`s.

Task authors should still <<configuration_cache_requirements.adoc#config_cache:requirements:disallowed_types, prefer `FileCollection`>> over `Configuration` in their task inputs.

> Built-in codecs also exist for collections, files, file collections, dependency results, build services, lambdas, and many Gradle-specific types.

Reviewer 2: :thinking: this is good, but instead of talking codecs we can just say that Gradle handles many standard Java and Gradle-specific types in a customized fashion - and add a link to to the requirement page - `config_cache:requirements:shared_objects`.

When none of these match, the bean codec is the fallback.
Types that can't be safely serialized (`ClassLoader`, `Thread`, and others) are rejected at store time rather than producing a failure on later load.

Gradle does not use Java Serialization, but it understands <<configuration_cache_status.adoc#config_cache:not_yet_implemented:java_serialization, a subset of its features>> for classes that opt in via `Externalizable` or `writeObject` / `readObject`.

> Using those features is supported but incurs a performance penalty and should be avoided in new code.

Reviewer 2: :x: Codecs are an implementation detail. We shouldn't expose them to users. From what I see, we're trying to describe transformations/simplifications that CC applies to the data. Let's phrase the docs in these terms instead.

I've added some comments about each codec on what to salvage and what can be dropped.

This isolation is what makes intra-project parallel task execution safe: tasks cannot leak mutable state to each other through a shared reference.

image::configuration-cache-8.png[]

Reference equality *is* preserved for instances of user-defined classes, but *is not* preserved for `String`, `File`, or many `java.util.Collection` types.
<<configuration_cache_requirements.adoc#config_cache:requirements:shared_objects, Sharing Mutable Objects>> walks through the implications with a runnable example.

[IMPORTANT]
====
After deserialization, each task operates on its own isolated copy of the object graph.
If two tasks shared the same `ArrayList` at configuration time, they each get an independent copy at execution time.
When task A adds an element to its list during execution, task B will *not* see the change — its copy is a separate object.

This is a common source of subtle bugs: code that worked without the Configuration Cache (where both tasks referenced the same in-memory list) silently breaks when the cache isolates them.
To share mutable state across tasks, use a <<build_services#build_services, Build Service>>.
====

==== Detecting configuration inputs

> While the task graph is being serialized, Gradle is also recording the build's <<config_cache:intro:build_configuration_inputs, configuration inputs>>: every environment variable, system property, file read, and file-system check the build performed during configuration.

Reviewer 2: :x: We record the inputs throughout the whole configuration phase, not only during serialization.

[[config_cache:intro:performance_improvements]]
== Performance Improvements

Beyond skipping the configuration phase on a cache hit, the Configuration Cache enables two performance optimizations that are not available without it.

[[config_cache:in_action]]
image::configuration-cache/running-help.gif[]

=== Parallel Task Execution

When the Configuration Cache is enabled, tasks *within the same project* can run in parallel, subject to their declared input/output dependencies.
Without the Configuration Cache, intra-project parallelism is constrained because tasks within a project share access to the `Project` instance and contend on project-level locks.
The Configuration Cache eliminates this contention by giving each task an isolated, deserialized copy of its state (see <<config_cache:intro:serialization, Serialization>>), so tasks no longer need to acquire project-level locks at execution time.

This complements Gradle's existing `--parallel` flag, which executes tasks across *different* projects in parallel.
With the Configuration Cache, parallelism applies *within* a single project as well.

> IMPORTANT: Intra-project parallel execution is always enabled when the Configuration Cache is active. The `--no-parallel` flag and `org.gradle.parallel=false` do not disable it. Builds that depend on tasks within the same project running sequentially should properly wire task inputs and outputs to enforce task order or use <<build_services.adoc#build_services, shared build services>> to coordinate access to shared resources.

Reviewer 2: :thinking: maybe also point readers to https://docs.gradle.org/current/userguide/build_services.html#accessing_the_build_service_concurrently directly?

=== Cached Dependency Resolution

Dependency resolution is one of the more expensive parts of a build's configuration phase.
Gradle walks the dependency graph, resolves versions, and computes the resulting classpaths.

When the Configuration Cache is enabled, the *resolved* dependency state becomes part of the cache entry: the resolved configurations, their files, and the artifact metadata are all serialized and replayed on a cache hit.
On a hit, dependency resolution does not re-run; tasks see the same resolved classpaths that the previous build computed.
On a miss, resolution runs as part of the configuration phase, and the result is stored alongside the rest of the entry.

Resolution under the Configuration Cache covers every resolvable configuration used as a task input, regardless of whether the tasks needing it run.
See <<config_cache:intro:behavior_differences, Behavioral Differences>> for the implications.

[[config_cache:intro:behavior_differences]]
== Behavioral Differences

> Enabling the Configuration Cache changes how every build executes — task isolation, eager dependency resolution, and the skipped configuration phase all apply universally.

Reviewer 2: ❓  Not sure if I understand what "all apply universally" tries to convey.

The sections below describe the most important differences to be aware of.

=== Dependency resolution is eager

Without the Configuration Cache, dependency resolution is lazy: a configuration is resolved only when a task that needs its files actually runs.
A build containing a configuration that cannot be resolved due to an invalid dependency or a misconfigured repository may still succeed if no scheduled task ever resolves that configuration.

With the Configuration Cache enabled, the resolved state of every declared configuration must be captured before execution begins so that it can be serialized into the cache entry.
Resolution happens during serialization, at the end of the configuration phase, regardless of whether the tasks that need a given configuration are scheduled to run.

This includes tasks that would otherwise be skipped at execution time.
For example, the Java plugin's compile task is skipped when its source set is empty; without the Configuration Cache the task's compile classpath is never resolved (so a configuration with an invalid dependency may go undetected).

> With the Configuration Cache enabled, resolution still happens at store time because the resolved state must be captured into the cache entry.

Reviewer 2: :thinking: I think we should remind the reader that the general contract of "you should resolve stuff at execution time only" still applies. Something along the lines:
>While dependency resolution by Configuration Cache happens at what is considered configuration time, this doesn't mean that the build logic should no longer obey the general rule of only resolving configurations at execution time. Gradle can apply different optimizations to dependency resolution performed by the Configuration Cache that are not possible for general build logic, so a well-formed build is still likely to perform better.

This can be a good place to mention parallel store as one of the potential optimizations.

The full set of rules build logic must follow under the Configuration Cache is enumerated in <<configuration_cache_requirements.adoc#config_cache:requirements, the requirements>>.

[[config_cache:security]]
== Security Considerations

The Configuration Cache serializes the configured state of every scheduled task into a cache entry stored under `.gradle/configuration-cache` in the project directory.
This includes any values reachable from task fields — which may contain credentials, tokens, API keys, or other sensitive data if they are held in task state.

Gradle encrypts Configuration Cache entries on disk using a machine-specific key stored in `<<directory_layout.adoc#dir:gradle_user_home,GRADLE_USER_HOME>>`.
However, anything with access to both the cache directory and the encryption key can read the entries.

Additionally, system properties and environment variables referenced during the configuration phase are recorded in the cache entry's fingerprint.

> If credentials are passed through these mechanisms, their values become part of the stored fingerprint data.

Reviewer 2: ❓ The order somewhat implies fingerprint data is not encrypted, but it actually is.

> To reduce the risk of exposing sensitive values through the Configuration Cache:

Reviewer 2: 🤔 I'd add "use lazy wiring, like `providers.environmentVariable`, to feed sensitive data to tasks and only obtain the values at execution time".

9. System properties used during the configuration phase
10. Environment variables used during the configuration phase

[[config_cache:intro:serialization]]
=== Serialization

Serialization is the mechanism that makes the Configuration Cache possible.
When Gradle stores a cache entry, it walks the configured task graph and writes a binary snapshot of every task and the state reachable from it.
When Gradle loads a cache entry, it reverses the process to reconstruct the task graph for execution.

==== What gets serialized

A Configuration Cache entry contains:

- The set of tasks scheduled to run, in dependency order.
- Each task instance's complete state: every reachable field is serialized, including private fields and fields that are not annotated as `@Input`, `@OutputFile`, or `@Internal`.
- The graph of objects reachable through those fields (file collections, providers, nested beans, dependency results, build service references).

Anything *not* reachable from a scheduled task is excluded.

> References to types that cannot survive the configuration-to-execution boundary (`Project`, `Gradle`, `ClassLoader`, `Configuration`, and others enumerated in <<configuration_cache_requirements.adoc#config_cache:requirements, the requirements>>) are rejected with a Configuration Cache problem at store time, before they can cause a runtime failure on a later load.

Reviewer: "cannot survive the configuration-to-execution boundary" is weird.  These types "survive" fine when running without CC.

How about something like "some complex types that are intimately connected to the Gradle lifecycle cannot be serialized".

Also, be careful about `Configuration`.  It can _sort of_ be serialized, as a collection of files.  Many examples show this.

Because every reachable field is captured, sensitive values held in task state (such as credentials, tokens, and API keys) also land in the cache entry.
Gradle encrypts cache entries on disk to mitigate the risk of accidental exposure.
See <<configuration_cache_requirements.adoc#config_cache:secrets, Handling of Credentials and Secrets>> for details.

The serialized task graph is stored alongside a separate **fingerprint**: the recorded list of configuration inputs the build observed (see <<config_cache:intro:build_configuration_inputs, Build Configuration Inputs>>).
The two are distinct: the entry holds the *result* of configuration, the fingerprint holds the *evidence* that the result is still valid.
Loading an entry on a hit uses both: Gradle replays the fingerprint to confirm validity, then deserializes the entry to reconstruct the task graph.

image::configuration-cache-7.png[]

==== Codecs

Gradle has a dedicated *codec* for each type or family of types it knows how to serialize.

> Three codecs are worth understanding:

Reviewer: I think the `Configuration` codec and serialization process is also vital to understand.

Using those features is supported but incurs a performance penalty and should be avoided in new code.

==== Task isolation through serialization

Serialization gives each task its **own** deserialized copy of the state it references.
Two tasks that, before serialization, both held a reference to the same `ArrayList` will end up holding independent (but equal) lists after the cache is loaded.
This isolation is what makes intra-project parallel task execution safe: tasks cannot leak mutable state to each other through a shared reference.

image::configuration-cache-8.png[]

Reference equality *is* preserved for instances of user-defined classes, but *is not* preserved for `String`, `File`, or many `java.util.Collection` types.
<<configuration_cache_requirements.adoc#config_cache:requirements:shared_objects, Sharing Mutable Objects>> walks through the implications with a runnable example.
To share state across tasks under the Configuration Cache, use a <<build_services#build_services, Build Service>>.

> Each task is otherwise its own isolated realm.

Reviewer: I think "each task is otherwise its own isolated realm" deserves even more emphasis - perhaps a callout?  Misunderstanding exactly the scenario in the image is a common failure point - then at execution time task a adds an element to the list, but task b doesn't see it.  Maybe adding exactly this example scenario to the callout would help.

==== Detecting configuration inputs

While the task graph is being serialized, Gradle is also recording the build's <<config_cache:intro:build_configuration_inputs, configuration inputs>>: every environment variable, system property, file read, and file-system check the build performed during configuration.
To capture those reads without requiring plugins to declare them, Gradle uses a Java agent and rewrites the bytecode of build-script and plugin classes at load time.
<<configuration_cache_requirements.adoc#config_cache:requirements:bytecode_modifications_and_isolation, Bytecode Modifications and Java Agent>> describes the implications and the Worker API escape hatch for libraries that can't tolerate rewriting.

[[config_cache:intro:behavior_differences]]
== Behavioral Differences

> Some builds behave differently when the Configuration Cache is enabled than when it is disabled.

Reviewer: 💅 Really, all builds.  But for some (well-structured) builds, you just won't care about the observable differences.

These differences are inherent to how the cache works and are worth knowing about, because a build that previously succeeded without the Configuration Cache may now fail with it enabled.

=== Dependency resolution is eager

Without the Configuration Cache, dependency resolution is lazy: a configuration is resolved only when a task that needs its files actually runs.

> A configuration that declares an invalid dependency, or one that depends on a misconfigured repository, may pass silently if no scheduled task ever touches it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A build containing a configuration that cannot be resolved due to an invalid dependency or a misconfigured repository may still succeed if no scheduled task ever resolves that configuration.
```

With the Configuration Cache enabled, the resolved state of every declared configuration must be captured before execution begins so that it can be serialized into the cache entry.

> Resolution therefore happens during configuration, or at the boundary between configuration and execution, regardless of whether the tasks that need a given configuration are scheduled to run.

Reviewer: Should we say "Resolution happens during serialization, at the end of the configuration phase"?

> This includes tasks that would otherwise skip early at execution time.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This includes tasks that would otherwise be skipped at execution time.
```

I don't like the words "early skip" - earlier than what?  The skip happens when the task would be executed.

> For example, the Java plugin's compile task is skipped when its source set is empty; without the Configuration Cache, the early skip also bypasses input fingerprinting, so the task's compile classpath is never resolved (a configuration with an invalid dependency may go undetected).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, the Java plugin's compile task is skipped when its source set is empty; without the Configuration Cache the task's compile classpath is never resolved (so a configuration with an invalid dependency may go undetected).
```

With the Configuration Cache enabled, resolution still happens at store time because the resolved state must be captured into the cache entry.

> A practical benefit of this: cache hits remain stable when sources are added to a previously empty project, since the dependency graph has already been resolved and serialized.

Reviewer: ❓ I'm not sure what this benefit is.  Source being source files added to a project?  Why would that affect configuration?

> The practical consequence: a build that contained latent dependency-declaration errors (an invalid coordinate in an unused configuration, a typo'd repository URL, missing credentials for a repository nobody actually fetched from) may pass without the Configuration Cache and fail with it enabled.

Reviewer: This paragraph is just repeating what was already explained.  Could the whole thing be dropped (or made into a short WARNING callout)?

=== Configuration-time problems surface earlier

More generally, the Configuration Cache promotes a number of latent configuration-time problems from "silent" to "failure."
Build scripts that rely on patterns the Configuration Cache rejects (such as referencing the `Project` object at execution time, capturing live JVM state in a task field, registering build listeners, and others) will fail at store time, even if the offending code path is rarely exercised at runtime.
The full set of rules build logic must follow under the Configuration Cache is enumerated in <<configuration_cache_requirements.adoc#config_cache:requirements, the requirements>>.

[[config_cache:intro:performance_improvements]]
== Performance Improvements

> Beyond skipping the configuration phase on a cache hit, the Configuration Cache enables two performance optimizations that are not available without it.

Reviewer: Maybe the Performance Improvements section should come before the Behavioral Differences section - to show the "good" before the "bad".

[[config_cache:in_action]]
image::configuration-cache/running-help.gif[]

=== Parallel Task Execution

> When the Configuration Cache is enabled, tasks within the same project can run in parallel, subject to their declared input/output dependencies.

Reviewer: 💅 Add emphasis on WITHIN here too

The Configuration Cache eliminates this contention by giving each task an isolated, deserialized copy of its state (see <<config_cache:intro:serialization, Serialization>>), so tasks no longer need to acquire project-level locks at execution time.

This complements Gradle's existing `--parallel` flag, which executes tasks across *different* projects in parallel.
With the Configuration Cache, parallelism applies *within* a single project as well.

=== Cached Dependency Resolution

Dependency resolution is one of the more expensive parts of a build's configuration phase.
Gradle walks the dependency graph, resolves versions, and computes the resulting classpaths.

When the Configuration Cache is enabled, the *resolved* dependency state becomes part of the cache entry: the resolved configurations, their files, and the artifact metadata are all serialized and replayed on a cache hit.
On a hit, dependency resolution does not re-run; tasks see the same resolved classpaths that the previous build computed.
On a miss, resolution runs as part of the configuration phase, and the result is stored alongside the rest of the entry.

> Resolution under the Configuration Cache also covers every declared configuration, regardless of whether the tasks needing it run.

Reviewer: ❗ Not every declared configuration - but every resolvable configuration used as a task input.

==== Codecs

Gradle has a dedicated *codec* for each type or family of types it knows how to serialize.
Four codecs are worth understanding:

- The *task node codec* writes and reads the units of the task graph itself.

> - The *bean codec* is the fallback for arbitrary user-defined classes; it walks reflective fields and recursively serializes each one.

Reviewer: it walks reflective fields -> it walks fields using reflection

This complements Gradle's existing `--parallel` flag, which executes tasks across *different* projects in parallel.
With the Configuration Cache, parallelism applies *within* a single project as well.

> IMPORTANT: Intra-project parallel execution is always enabled when the Configuration Cache is active. The `--no-parallel` flag and `org.gradle.parallel=false` do not disable it. Builds that depend on tasks within the same project running sequentially may need to declare explicit task dependencies or use <<build_services.adoc#build_services, shared build services>> to coordinate access to shared resources.

Reviewer: Instead of "may need to declare explicit task dependencies" how about "should properly wire task inputs and outputs to enforce task order"

The Configuration Cache serializes the configured state of every scheduled task into a cache entry stored under `.gradle/configuration-cache` in the project directory.
This includes any values reachable from task fields — which may contain credentials, tokens, API keys, or other sensitive data if they are held in task state.

Gradle encrypts all Configuration Cache data on disk, both the serialized task graph and the fingerprint, using a machine-specific key stored in `<<directory_layout.adoc#dir:gradle_user_home,GRADLE_USER_HOME>>`.
However, anything with access to both the cache directory and the encryption key can read the entries.

System properties and environment variables referenced during the configuration phase are recorded in the fingerprint.
If credentials are passed through these mechanisms, their values become part of the stored data.

> Use lazy wiring, like `providers.environmentVariable`, to feed sensitive data to tasks and only obtain the values at execution time.

Reviewer 2: 💅 Maybe add a link to [ProviderFactory](https://docs.gradle.org/current/javadoc/org/gradle/api/provider/ProviderFactory.html#environmentVariable(java.lang.String))?
